So what we're going
to talk about now
are the final set of
intermediate operations
we're going to cover
in this discussion,
intermediate operations.
And these will be the
dropWhile and takeWhile
intermediate operations.
DropWhile and takeWhile
are both stateful,
short-circuiting
operations that were
introduced into Java
Streams starting with Java 9
and beyond.
These were actually not
in Java 8 originally.
And this is somewhat
significant because if you're
an Android programmer, you
have to be aware that Android--
at least up to this point--
only supports up to Java 8.
It doesn't support versions
of Java beyond Java 8.
So if you're programming
with Android,
you won't be able to use
these Java 9 features.
But, of course, if you're
not programming for Android
and you can use the latest
versions of anything
after Java 9 or Java 9
and beyond, then of course
you'll be able to use
dropWhile and takeWhile
intermediate operations.
Unlike filter, flatMap,
map, and mapToInt--
which were stateless,
run-to-completion operations--
dropWhile and
takeWhile are stateful,
short-circuiting operations.
I take that back--
no, I don't take that back.
Short-circuiting operations.
At first glance, you
might think that filter is
a short-circuiting operation,
but it actually isn't.
Filter has to look at
every element in the input
in order to decide what
to let through or not.
So it's not short-circuiting.
And we'll see that
when we compare
and contrast dropWhile
and filter more closely
in just a moment.
So let's begin our
discussion by talking
about the dropWhile
intermediate operation.
So this is an
interesting operation.
And it has a couple of
different semantics depending
on properties of the stream.
So it turns out that streams
can either be ordered
or they can be unordered.
So if they're unordered,
then we don't really
care what the ordering is.
If they're ordered, then
they have a particular order.
So if a stream is
unordered, then dropWhile
will return a stream that
consists of the remaining
elements in the stream
after first dropping
the subset of the elements in
the stream, the input stream,
that match the given predicate.
So what we're going to
do here-- basically,
you can sort of think
of this as like a while
loop instead of the
equivalent of a while loop.
And as long as the
predicate is not satisfied,
we're going to the
dropWhile method.
We'll just drop the
elements from the stream.
And only if and
when the predicate
is satisfied or is met,
then those elements
will proceed through.
So it's kind of like
filter, but it's
going to skip over
things that don't match.
Now if the stream is ordered,
then the output stream
that's returned from dropWhile
will contain the remaining
elements of the
stream after dropping
the longest prefix of elements
that match the given predicate.
So again, if it's
ordered then things
have a slightly
different behavior
than if they're not
ordered or unordered.
Now, dropWhile it's kind of
an interesting operation.
Because it's stateful, it
tends not to work very well
in ordered parallel streams.
And that's because the semantics
of ordering and parallel
mean that this threads that
are running in the thread
pool in the parallel
stream implementation
have to actually
cooperate to find
the longest contiguous
sequence of matching elements
in the encounter order.
And this turns out
to be rather tricky.
It's not that it doesn't work.
The streams framework
will make sure you
get the correct result. However,
it just takes more time.
And if you think back
to our discussion
about when is parallelism
effective-- when is parallelism
worth it?
One of things I mentioned
was in situations
where the tasks that
run are independent,
you have embarrassingly
parallel tasks.
They don't depend on each other.
Well, for this
particular case, if you
have an ordered
parallel stream, that
means that the order in
which the input comes in it
actually matters.
And so as a result, the parallel
threads have to collaborate,
which means that there are
dependencies that now exist.
And so this just makes
things take longer to run.
So dropWhile, it will work
semantically and correctly
for an ordered parallel stream.
It probably won't give you
very much of a performance win.
And we'll talk about
this later when
we talk more
systematically about when
to use parallel streams and when
not to use parallel streams.
So for right now,
we're going to focus
on sequential streams, which
has been our main emphasis has
been for these several weeks.
Now thinking back
to whether you get
the same results in the output
stream as the input stream,
dropWhile is more like
filter in the sense
that the number of
output stream elements
may be less than the number
of input stream elements.
So obviously, if the
predicate matches
the entire stream that comes
in, everything will get dropped.
And it will only not be dropped
when it starts to not match.
So it's possible for dropWhile
to return a different number
of elements in it's output
than it received as its input.
However, even
though I used filter
as sort of the analogous
discussion point here,
it's important to realize that
the semantics of dropWhile
differ in subtle
and important ways
from the semantics of filter.
The main difference is this.
Filter has to look at
every single element
in order to decide whether it
passes the predicate or not.
DropWhile, in contrast, will
keep dropping up to the point
where the predicate
no longer matches
at which point it short
circuits and then returns
the rest of the stream to the
next phase in the pipeline.
So it doesn't have to
look at all the elements
whereas filter does.
Another important
thing to remember--
and this is a bit more
like filter as well--
is the dropWhile can't
change the type or values
of the elements
that it processes.
So if you end up with a stream
of integers, you'll end up--
after you dropWhile
with a stream
of integers-- as the output.
So it can't change the results.
And we'll see some examples of
this when we look at the code
that we want to analyze.
Here's a program
that illustrates
the use of dropWhile.
And this is used to basically
print slices of the results.
And so the way this works is
we've got a list of results--
let's say we have a
list of all the results
that matched in the stream.
And just make the example
fun let's assume it's our do,
re, mi example.
So we're going to convert
the list of search results
into a stream.
And then we're going to
collect the stream into a map.
And I'm not going to talk
about this in great detail
now because we haven't
really gone through all
the examples in great detail.
But basically, there's a
collector called groupingBy.
And what groupingBy
does is it goes ahead
and it will group the
elements in the stream in
to, essentially, a map.
And in this case, the map
will be a map of words.
And then it's going to
have the results that
come after that-- basically,
where the things occurred
in the input.
So we then take the
map, and we convert it
into a stream of its entries.
So we say map.entrySet, which
gives you a set of entries,
a set of key value pairs.
We turn that into a stream
of these entries or key value
pairs.
And then we're going
to drop everything that
doesn't equal a given word.
So let's say our
stream contained
our original list of results
was for do, re, mi, fa, so,
la, ti in that order.
And let's say we
just want to print
the ones that are going to be--
we're going to drop a
subset of these things.
So we're going to ignore entries
up until there's a match.
Let's say we want to
print from fa to the end.
So in that particular
case, dropWhile
will ignore everything up into
the point where we get a match.
And in this particular
case, the match
is just matching to see
whether the word that we
want to start
printing from matches
the key that's in the entrySet.
So we just keep dropping
stuff until we hit a match.
At that point, the rest
of the stream is included.
And then we'll go ahead and
print the results starting
at wherever we found the match.
We'll walk through this
example in more detail later.
I just wanted to give you a
quick overview of how dropWhile
fits visually and
with a little code
into the overall
programming model.
What I'd like to
do now is describe
the takeWhile
intermediate operation.
And as you'll see,
takeWhile is essentially
the inverse of dropWhile.
So again, if a
stream is unordered,
if we don't really care what
order the data comes in,
then takeWhile will
return a stream consisting
of the subset of elements taking
from the input stream that
match the given predicate.
So it'll keep taking
while there's a match.
And then when there's no more
match, it'll stop taking.
Those pieces will be ignored.
In contrast, if the
stream is ordered,
then it will return a stream
consisting of the longest
prefix of elements taken from
the stream that match the given
predicate.
And this distinction between
ordered and unordered
is again important
because takeWhile
is a stateful operation
that's very expensive to use
for ordered parallel streams.
Because once again,
the threads that
are running in
the fork-join pool
have to cooperate to find the
longest contiguous sequence
of matching elements
in encounter order.
And that can get costly.
And it'll take a while to run.
So it'll work, but
probably not a good idea
to use takeWhile for
ordered parallel streams.
And our example doesn't
need to do that.
The semantics of takeWhile
are very similar in some ways
to the semantics of
dropWhile in that
the number of output
stream elements
might be less than the number
of input stream elements.
So again, if you takeWhile,
something matches.
So that will be included
in the output stream.
But once you don't get
a match, at that point,
the elements are ignored.
However, as with dropWhile,
the semantics of takeWhile
will differ from the
semantic of filter.
Because once again,
filter has to look
at everything in
the input stream
in order to decide
whether to keep it or not.
Whereas takeWhile only
keeps looking until it finds
something that doesn't match.
And then it ignores
everything else.
Also like the dropWhile
method, takeWhile
is not able to change the type
or the value of the elements
that it happens to process.
So let's take a
look at an example.
This will look very similar
to what we did before
with the dropWhile method.
The main difference,
of course, is
we're using takeWhile
not dropWhile this time.
But other than that,
it's much the same thing.
So again, let's say we
have a list of results
that come into the program.
And we convert the list
of results into a stream.
We then go ahead and collect
that stream of results
into a map where the key
and the map will be the word
and the value will
be the location where
the word occurred in the input.
We'll come back again later
and talk about how this all
works in more detail.
We then take that
map of entries.
And we convert it
into an entry set,
which is a data structure
that contains key value pairs.
We turn that into a stream of
these key value pairs, which
are known as entries.
And then we go ahead
and do takeWhile.
And takeWhile will keep
returning entries up
until the point where
the predicate matches.
So we keep returning entries
until it doesn't match.
So we're going to go
through and return
the entries until the
predicate no longer works.
What we end up with then
is basically a prefix
of the things that matched.
And it'll start
from the beginning
and continue up to,
but not including,
where the actual match occurred.
So in this particular case,
the match that we're doing
is notEquals.
So we're basically
going to ignore things.
We take stuff up to the
point where we find a word,
and then we ignore
it at that point.
So that's basically the behavior
of this particular example.
Now, once again, we will
come back in more detail
and look at this in a
lot more full-blown glory
when we look at some of
the other methods that
are part of the simple
search stream program.
Just to kind of take stock of
all the intermediate operations
we've covered as we've been
going through this section,
the map intermediate
operation is very common.
The filter intermediate
Those are arguably the two most
common intermediate operations
of all time and
certainly the ones
we've talked about
the most common.
FlatMap not quite as common
but very powerful, very useful.
I'll use it repeatedly
throughout the examples.
Things like mapToInt
turn out to be useful
if you have to do
with primitive types.
We'll see some more
examples of those later.
And some of the things like
takeWhile and dropWhile,
while they're useful, much
more limited in applicability.
So as we go through
the rest of the course,
you'll see other examples
that use all these methods.
But I think you'll find that map
and filter are by far the most
common ones followed by flatMap.
And the other ones get used
sparingly and on occasion.
But it's helpful
to understand how
these different
intermediate operations fit
into that taxonomy of
stateless/stateful on one hand
and run to completion and
short-circuiting on the other.
So again, as you'll see, as
we go through this stuff,
we'll talk a lot more about
the details of why things
work one way or the other.
What are the
performance implications
of stateless vs. state?
What are the
performance implications
of short-circuit versus
run to completion?
And this gets
especially interesting
when we get into the
parallel streams world
where simple syntactic
solutions that are easy to write
may not work the way you
expect performance wise because
of the semantics of
Java parallel streams.